In this video I'm going to talk to you about eigenvalues and I can vectors or more generally I can decomposition.
I will provide an algebraic and a geometric interpretation of I can vectors and eigenvalues you will
see how to do all this stuff in Python of course and you will be introduced to this concept of diagonal
ization.
I can do composition is one of the most important concepts in linear algebra.
It's a central operation to many areas of statistics machine learning data compression multivariate
signal processing and so on and so if you aren't really familiar with I can be composition or I can
vectors then this video is going to be super exciting.
All right so let me begin by saying that I can be composition is defined only four square matrices.
So all the matrices when you're talking about I can be composition have to be m by m so the same number
of rows as columns.
There is another D composition called these singular value decomposition and that works for any size
Matrix m by n where M does not equal N and I'm going to talk about these singular value decomposition
in a later video so the idea of ion the competition is to represent a matrix or to extract out of a
matrix a set of eigenvalues and associated ion vectors.
So for an m by m matrix there is going to be m ion vectors and a corresponding number of eigenvalues
and these all come in pairs.
So this is the eigenvalues that's associated with this specific ion vector and so on.
But what our ion vectors and eigenvalues and what do they mean.
Well let's start this discussion by thinking about what happens when you multiply a matrix by a vector
and I already discussed this in the previous video.
The answer is that you get another vector so A times V equals vector W and we can plot V and W on the
same plot and that might look something like this.
So perhaps vector V so this would of course be for a two dimensional vector and a two by two matrix
because we have a two dimensional plot here.
So vector V might look something like this in vector W might look something like this.
And so one of the main points of the previous video was that the effect of multiplying a matrix by a
vector is that the Matrix will rotate and stretch or shrink that vector.
So but the rotation is key for for this concept.
So in nearly all cases nearly all pairs of matrices and vectors multiplying these two objects together
is going to rotate the initial vector but it turns out that there is a small number of special vector
matrix combinations such that when you multiply the matrix by the vector you actually get another vector
that's all on the same line.
So it looks just like the original vector V maybe it's a little bit longer.
Maybe it's the same length.
Maybe it's a little bit shorter but it's the same line.
And when you find such a vector then that vector V is called an icon vector of this matrix A and to
be clear there is nothing special about this vector on its own and there is nothing special about this
matrix on its own.
So vector V is not going to be an icon vector of some other matrix or it's unlikely to be an icon vector
of some other matrix.
It is a unique pairing of V and A that makes this special combination true.
And because w vector w lies in the same line as vector V then the effect of matrix A on vector V is
actually just scaling it.
So it says if we take a single number and multiply that by the vector so matrix vector multiplication
is acting just like scalar vector multiplication so that is really special.
And now we can say I mean get rid of this middleman here we can say that lambda the equals a V.
Again this is a special relationship between this specific lambda this specific scalar or single number.
This specific vector and this specific matrix but when you can find a matrix and a vector and a scalar
such that this equality holds such that this statement is true then this is called an icon vector of
matrix A and this is the associated icon value.
And this equation here is called the icon value equation OK so this is both a geometric and an algebraic
interpretation of eye candy composition.
Now here I'm only showing you one I can value and one I can vector but I mentioned in the previous slide
that I can do composition actually gives a full set of M I can vectors and M eigenvalues.
So this is just for one of those so we can rewrite this equation in matrix form instead of in Matrix
scalar vector form and that's going to look something like this.
So we have this matrix A.
So this is a m by m matrix.
This is a matrix of ion vectors so each I can vector is in a column of this matrix and you see the same
matrix repeated over here and then this is a capital lambda.
This is a matrix of eigenvalues where the eigenvalues are in the diagonal.
So this is the matrix version of the eigenvalues equation that I showed in the previous slides.
Now this matrix here is a diagonal matrix as I will show you in a moment and therefore I can the composition
is also sometimes called diagonal ization because the idea is that you are transforming this matrix
A which is likely to be a dense matrix into a sparse matrix like this and a diagonal matrix that has
all zeros and the eigenvalues on the diagonal.
Now because these matrices are all square the icon vector vectors matrix is square and it's also full
rank and that means that each icon vector is independent of each other.
I can vector now there's a few small exceptions to this which I talk about more in my full course on
linear algebra.
It's a little bit outside the scope of this lecture but it's OK for now we can assume it's generally
safe to assume that the ion vectors matrix is in vertical.
It has an inverse and that means that we can actually isolate matrix A on the left and get this equality
here v lambda v inverse and now we can also make pictures of this.
So that would look something like this.
So here we take some matrix A.
This is just some you know it's just a bunch of random numbers that I've generated and I took its eye
candy composition and that gave me two matrices the matrix of ion vectors where each column of this
matrix contains an icon vector and this is the diagonal matrix of the eigenvalues where each diagonal
element has the icon value associated with each column of the icon vector.
So that means you know this icon value here.
This is the second to last diagonal element.
This is the corresponding icon value for this column of this matrix or this I can vector right here
and then here we have this same v vector.
So the matrix of icon vectors but it's the inverse what I'm going to do now in Python is show you some
of these matrices and I can be competition.
So let's start by creating a matrix.
I'll call this em.
I'm going to first generate this to be random numbers.
I won't even random integers.
Let's go from minus five to plus six and let's make this.
Of course this has to be a five by five matrix but I'm actually going to set this initially to be a
non square matrix.
This just show you what happens okay.
So I'm going to write I vowels and I Vex.
So these are gonna be two outputs from the NUM pi.
Lin Algebra II function which is going to compute the I the composition on matrix M and now we get an
error and the error message says that the dimensions of the array must be squared.
So essentially this is telling us that it cannot compute the eye candy composition because this is not
a square matrix.
Okay.
So now I'm actually also going to do something else I'm going to multiply this matrix by its transpose
and that's essentially going to guarantee that we get real value.
I can do composition instead of a complex value.
I can do composition again.
There's a theory there's a reason for this but it's a bit outside the scope of this short video.
OK.
So now we have these eigenvalues and ion vectors and be nice to look at these and see what they look
like.
So I'm going to draw a couple of axes here so P L T that subplots.
Let's do it one by three layout so I'm gonna show the original matrix the I can vectors and then the
eigenvalues.
So let's see x 0 that I am show em and that's probably a good idea to put a title on this set title
I'll call this the matrix not capital the Matrix that's the movie from the 90s lowercase matrix and
let's see now we need X 1 is going to be I am show let's show the eigenvalues matrix so I vowels and
then this gets a title of eigenvalues and then we want to plot I am show the I again vectors like this.
So now we do X 2 and set title I again value x vectors.
This is interesting we get an error let's see what this error says it says invalid dimensions for image
data.
So we're having a hard time or Python is having a difficult time generating an image of the eye again
values.
So then we actually start just by commenting out this line.
Okay.
And now we see the matrix we see a matrix of ion vectors and what's going on with this eigenvalues.
Let's have a look at these.
I'm going to print them out so print I vowels and actually let me also type uh P L T that shows we don't
get this extra output text here.
Okay.
So it looks like the eye vowels the output of the eye function is one two three four five elements and
it's just a vector and that actually makes sense.
So we get five eigenvalues that come out of this five by five matrix.
So let's look at the the doc string the health text here.
This says that the output is going to be the eigenvalues in an array.
Okay.
And so what we want to do is is plot this as a matrix.
So we want to convert this into a diagonal matrix and you will recall from the video earlier in this
section about special matrices how to do that.
So I'm going to use P that Di egg and that's going to create a diagonal matrix or I should say of full
matrix so a square matrix where the all the elements are zeros and the diagonal elements correspond
to the vector that was input it into the dialogue function OK.
And so again this is called diagonal ization because we are transforming this matrix into a matrix that
contains only diagonal elements or only non-zero elements on the diagonal.
And the transformation matrix to get us from the original matrix into this diagonal matrix is the matrix
of ion vectors.
Now there's one more quick thing that I would like to do before closing off this video and that is to
illustrate the algebraic interpretation of ion vectors and eigenvalues.
So I'm going to compute the matrix times and I can vector.
So let's say m times I Vex and I'm going to do not all of the ion vectors just let's just take the first
one.
So this is gonna be the first ion vector so the first column and then so this is a matrix times the
I can vector should be I vectors and then I'm gonna write L V for lambda V.
And that is simply a scalar.
So I vowels.
And then it's just gonna be the first element times this same I again vectors like this.
Oh right.
And then I'm going to print both of these.
So print M V and then print L V.
And now you see that these two results are exactly the same.
In other words multiplying this matrix.
So this is a five by five matrix and the matrix times this vector is exactly the same as a single number
times the same vector.
And that is pretty special it's pretty wild.
And that is the algebraic definition or the meaning of iron composition in this video.
I introduced you to the algebraic and geometric interpretations of ion vectors and eigenvalues and I
also introduced you to the idea of diagonal ization.
Don't go too far away because in the next video there's going to be a really interesting and insightful
exercise that's going to reveal some interesting properties of ion d composition so I will see you soon.